BLACK CODE COLLECTIVE

BLACK LIVES MATTER
BLACK TECH WORKERS MATTER
A BLACK TECH WORKER'S MANIFESTO

As first-generation Black tech workers, we have excelled in positions in a field once obscured for many who look like us. However, recent events have reminded us that no matter the success we obtain personally, we still exist in a culture where our bodies threaten and make others feel uncomfortable. We refuse to let this go by unaddressed in the tech community. We do not proclaim to have all the answers. Frankly, it was exhausting for us to sit down under the weight of oppression and still muster the energy to research and write to educate others. However, when we think about why we created Black Code Collective we remember that this community has recognized and empowered our Black voices and we want to contribute to building a world where the next generation of Black and Brown tech workers have respect our ancestors deeply desired. We don't write these words to educate every white person in tech, but as a reminder to our community on what we deserve.

-Black Code Collective Founders

RECRUITING
To hire a diverse workforce requires a lot more effort than what has currently been done in most tech companies. Recruiting diverse candidates will require a holistic and serious reform in hiring practices. Below are some of the ways we can challenge assertions that companies have made.

THE PIPELINE ISSUE
Recruiting from colleges and universities is a common practice amongst most major tech companies. One of the things we have noticed is the large difference in recruitment from “elite” universities where - because of economic and institutional racism - it is harder for Black students to attend and graduate from. One way to expand the pipeline is by recruiting and investing in hiring from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Another way to expand the pipeline is to recruit through conferences and groups focused on uplifting diverse candidates like National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE).

INCLUSIVE JOB DESCRIPTIONS
The first thing a lot of candidates will be judging a company on is their job posting. Through the language provided in the job descriptions, it could cause a lot of candidates who are qualified to not even bother applying. Make sure that the job descriptions are gender-neutral and qualifications that reflect what the actual job will need to be done. Including in job descriptions that candidates are not expected to know 100% of the things listed. It should state that the organization values growth and the ability to learn. These changes will increase the likelihood of diverse candidates applying.

ABOLISH GPA REQUIREMENTS
Studies have also found that Grade Point Averages (GPAs) are ineffective in predicting an applicant's performance on the job. GPAs create barriers for people who may not have had the economic wealth/support to maintain or even earn "good grades". As universities and schools become more expensive a lot of Black and Brown students have had to work more jobs outside of school to pay for their education. As they try to balance work/school GPAs tend to decrease. We challenge companies to look beyond GPAs and test these students through their skills rather than completely discarding them based on GPA.

REFERENCES
https://www.forbes.com/sites/janicegassam/2018/12/18/5-reasons-why-the-pipeline-problem-is-just-a-myth/#5e58ed18227a

https://www.fastcompany.com/90225190/4-diversity-recruiting-challenges-for-tech

https://hr.fas.harvard.edu/files/fas-hr/files/recruiting_for_diversity_9.17.13_0.pdf

https://www.hrdive.com/news/should-employers-care-about-gpa-anymore/528430/

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/285040780_College_Grade_Point_Average_as_a_Predictor_of_Adult_Success_A_Meta-Analytic_Review_and_Some_Additional_Evidence

INCLUSION
Acquiring a diverse workforce is only step one of the processes. Once you have hired the candidates, you should work to make sure these candidates feel included within your workplace. Every company will have slightly different needs, but below are some helpful ways you can make sure your Black employees feel welcome.

IT STARTS AT THE TOP
Leadership should lead the charge in signaling how valued diverse voices are. This can be verbally stated, but the action is the most important part here. For example, if leadership notices minority employees are being ignored in meetings or their ideas are quickly dismissed, they should swiftly speak up and clear the floor for the employee to speak again. This can be as simple as “I’m sorry Taylor, what was that you were saying?”. This signals to everyone in the room that this behavior will not be tolerated, and will hopefully lead to everyone’s voices being equally valued.

SEE OUR DIFFERENCES AND CELEBRATE THEM
We want to live in a world that recognizes and celebrates the rich cultures that are around us. Organizations should strive to see the differences in their employees and celebrate them. Celebrating these differences can include recognizing various holidays such as Black History Month, Pride Month and having spaces like meditation or prayer rooms. Acknowledging when certain work tragedies are affecting a particular subset of our population such as police brutality as well as protests are important to support the personal aspect of employees. Refusing to stay silent in these moments can help send a strong message to your Black and Brown employees that they are seen and their lives are relevant.

SPONSORSHIP
It’s no secret that Black employees struggle to rise through the ranks of companies. Part of this is because systemic racism has made it more difficult for Black employees to have connections in senior roles to help them learn and network. That’s why it’s highly effective to partner new Black employees with experienced hires. The experienced hire should not only help the new employee settle into the job but serve as an advocate for the employee. Harvard Business Review has found “that women of color who say they have sponsors are 81% more likely to be satisfied with their career progression than those without sponsors”.

INCREASE FEEDBACK OPPORTUNITIES
We all have unconscious biases. Minorities - especially Black tech workers (since we are often the smallest demographic in organizations) feel these are weaponized against us. Black employees may feel nervous or out of place joining predominantly white organizations. Some may read their nervous or shy behavior as not being “a team player” or being “so independent “. It’s important to remember and respect the differences in various relationships at work. Furthermore, if an employee receives feedback from one co-worker, this increases the chances of unconscious bias taking place. Alternatively, organizations should make it easy for anyone to provide praise to fellow employees. Thus, elevating everyday work that employees do and removing the chance for one point of failure.

REFERENCES:
How To Create A More Inclusive Workplace Culture

5 Strategies for Creating an Inclusive Workplace

6 Steps for Building an Inclusive Workplace

FRAMEWORK FOR PROMOTING DIVERSE TALENT
Having all-Black security, and Latino janitorial staff does not constitute a diverse workforce. A truly diverse organization has space at every level of the organization for those of different race-ethnicity, gender, sexuality, ability, and other human traits that have been used to categorize people. We believe it's vitally important that organizations begin to reflect on how they make space for diverse talent to exceed within their organization and overcome routine and oppressive biases.

WORKPLACE RACISM
From being singled out and forced by non-security staff to show your badge to prove you work at a company, to focusing on negative comments, Black workers face a bombardment of unfair practices that discourage them from feeling like their workplace is supportive. Tech organizations need to recognize and validate that workplace racism is real and it appears in various forms, covertly and overtly. Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion are fundamental to the success of organizations.

NOT KNOWING HOW TO ADVOCATE
For many Black tech workers, we did not grow up having people in our community who worked in tech or even corporate America. Skills like advocating for one's career (that may seem second nature to many white colleagues) can be foreign notions to people of color. Many Black tech workers suffer from Imposter Syndrome which often inhibits them from advocating for themselves because they do not feel like they are smart or worthy enough to be in certain positions. We often do not know how to ask for positions, salaries, and responsibilities we deserve. And when we try, we could be made to feel as if it is inappropriate to ask. Coincidentally, the company’s leadership may not have awareness of individual contributors' struggles. This gap often leads to Black workers feeling unsupported by their organization. Combating these feelings can be done by providing coaching on how to communicate contributions, as well as training for management on how to evaluate talent equitably.

UNCONSCIOUS BIAS SELECTING LEADERS
There is an important and complex relationship between race and career advancement that is predicated on social capital [1]. One study showed that “blacks suffer a social capital deficit relative to whites and that men and whites’ career advantages accumulate over time, whereas blacks’ disadvantages accumulate, as well” [2]. Study after study shows that "being white" is perceived to be an attribute of someone characterized as a leader. To open avenues for Black tech workers to advance, more diverse voices need to be a part of the conversation of a candidate’s promotion. And those voices need to be treated with weight and respect. A variety of perspectives help to paint a more vivid picture of an individual contributors' impact on the organization. Leaders must also recognize and hold with the respect that seeing Black leaders in higher positions within an organization communicates to Black workers in lower ranks the possibility of advancement within the organization. It’s empowering and important for minorities to have minority leaders to look up to.

NO CLEAR PATH TO PROMOTION
Stepping into many tech organizations can feel like a wild jungle. With so much going on (especially for startups) tech workers can often be focused on putting out fires. And without a clear path that connects the work a person does to their status within the organization, advancement can seem out of reach. The notion that if “you work hard, you’ll be rewarded” is often not true for Black tech workers. These ambiguous guidelines for career advancement, lead to resentment and frustration as Black employees feel unsure of how their impact will be measured at their workplaces. For this reason, it is important to have a clear objective path to promotion. Black tech employees deserve to know how and what it takes to succeed within an organization.

REFERENCES
Race-Related Differences in Promotions and Support: Underlying Effects of Human and Social Capital

The Effects of Social Group Membership and Social Capital Resources on Careers

The role of social capital in the relationship between human capital and career mobility: Moderator or mediator?

Linking Mentoring and Social Capital: Implications for Career and Organization Development

The Effect of Group Mentoring on Career Outcomes

SALARY TRANSPARENCY
Doing the work to recruit and hire Black employees is futile if those employees will ultimately be paid inequitably. One of the biggest reasons underrepresented minorities leave the tech industry (not just their current organizations or professions) is feeling undervalued. There are many ways to value an employee, however, fair compensation is the most impactful means. And while many companies have strategies for increasing the likelihood that their employees are paid fairly, salary transparency is one of the best ways to ensure equitable pay.

WHAT IS IT?
Pay Transparency is a term that encompasses a wide array of practices. It can be applied to organizations with a documented and research-based salary system that makes it easy to gauge the salary band of a given position within an organization and in comparison to the job market at large, even if they don’t share individual salaries. More commonly it’s applied to the practice of making individual employee salary data accessible either publicly or internally. No matter where an organization falls on the pay transparency scale, what is required is there is a data-driven salary structure that is competitive with the market and commensurate with experience, skill sets, organization contributions, or any other defined metrics.

ELIMINATING UNCONSCIOUS BIAS
Implicit biases, which we all have, can adversely impact how a prospective or current employee is perceived and evaluated. In an organization with pay transparency, the adverse impact these biases have can be reduced or even eliminated. An employee’s salary is based on how they measure against a predefined set of objectives dictated by their position, not unrelated factors like shared experiences or background with leadership, negotiating skills, or worse race. Additionally, all employees know what is required to increase their pay and elevate within the organization.

IT’S ALREADY HERE
While the idea of openly sharing salary data may seem awkward or even radical, the truth is salary sharing is already happening. Many underrepresented minorities in tech are sharing salary and compensation data widely within their networks, and in some cases publicly (via Glassdoor or even Twitter), as a means to prevent pay disparities and avoid companies with existing pay equity issues. Besides, many younger workers simply don’t believe open salary conversations are taboo. Salary data will be shared regardless of whether organizations implement salary transparency measures.

REFERENCES
What is Pay Transparency & Why Does It Matter?

Does Pay Transparency Close the Gender Wage Gap

Negotiating Alone Won’t Fix the Wage Gap

Like It or Not, Pay Transparency Is Coming (So Better Get Ready)

TRAINING AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Too often organizations like to boast about their diversity initiatives as a solution to racial bias when those solutions can be used to cover up systemic issues. The context and presumptions about race are within everyone. This is why it is important to have conversations and training about discrimination and bias in the workplace. These dialogues help illuminate the small microaggressions minorities feel constantly. Instances like asking to touch a person of color's hair, telling a person of color that they look off because they decide to change hairstyles and wear their hair naturally, or even the use of informal slang (e.g., "What’s up dog?") by a white person specifically towards a person of color, all demonstrate unconscious bias and treatment we are constantly subjected to. Diversity training has been shown to help encourage more pro-diversity behavior among employees, especially when tailored to an organization. If organizations want to help their employees acknowledge their own racial biases, provide informal mentorship to racial minorities, and recognize the excellent work of their peers who were racial minorities, it’s important they first see these issues in a safe space like in a diversity training. Let us be clear, this is not a one-off exercise just to check a training box. This should be a constant dialogue that is coached and facilitated so that employees may become more aware of their unconscious bias. As this training becomes embedded within an organization, employees will feel empowered to personally speak up against the problems they witness.

REFERENCES
5 Strategies for Creating an Inclusive Workplace

Two Types of Diversity Training That Really Work

RESOURCES TO HELP WITH DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION INITIATIVES
ORGANIZATIONS
Hill Street Strategies

Diversity Tech

Racial Equity Institute

Bravely

Project Basta

BOOKS
How to Be an Antiracist

White Fragility

The Color of Law

So You Want to Talk about Race


ABOUT US
In 2016 we wanted to start an organization that would provide a safe space and community for Black software engineers. We called it Black Code Collective (BCC). Since BCC has come to fruition, many people have asked me why such a community is necessary; they ask why Black people don’t just join the tech groups that already exist. Here’s why we think it’s fundamental that we exist:

As Black people in corporate America, we are often one of a few Black people (if not the only Black person) in our workplaces. Reflective of our larger world, our work spaces are overwhelmingly started and run by white people, and this default brings about an unspoken burden for black people. We sometimes fear that if we make a misstep at work, it will trigger a bias of our peers or cause them to assume that we only have our position because of affirmative action or similar race quotas. With an organization like BCC, this stress is momentarily lifted from our shoulders. We are among individuals to whom we can relate and among whom we are more likely to ask questions.

Asking questions is a key way for all of us to learn and grow, but if we’re in an environment where we’re too nervous to ask questions, our growth can be stunted. Not only does this brief break from the reality of the workplace give minorities chances to ask questions and sharpen our skills, being told that a question isn’t stupid, and that someone else struggled with that same topic can be a sanity check. That support can inspire us to speak up when we’re back in our work environment.

Another tentacle of this beast is the fact that the life experiences of Black and white people can vary drastically. That sometimes makes the ideas that they value very different; particularly ideas that would solely target the Black community. Others may see little to no value in an idea because it’s not applicable to their lives. For example, having an app that would teach lesser known Black history facts. If a Black engineer had an idea like this, they could come to BCC, run the idea by us, and the idea could be nurtured and able to grow further. BCC members could not only provide the Black perspective, they can provide technical insight into the feasibility of the app as well.

In addition, these different life experiences can also leave a gap in mentoring connections. Minorities have certain work experiences that a white colleague will not, so it’s beneficial for us to have a support system to which we can turn for advice in these situations. It could be something as simple as how a Black woman wears her hair in the workplace. Some styles she may sport could be deemed “unprofessional” or “unkempt”. Having the support of someone who has experienced similar stress can be comforting, and allow for more in-depth advice.  

Keeping in the Know

A lot of opportunities are awarded through nepotism and other forms of favoritism toward those in a particular network. It’s uncommon for many minorities to be in the know about these positions and, even if they do know, they can sometimes be overlooked because another candidate has an inside connection. BCC aims to help bridge this gap. We talk daily through Slack (an online chat communication application) to share opportunities that we each know about as well as to make connections through our networks when necessary.

In addition to sharing opportunities, we also share information about new technologies and have technical discussions. Conversations within a safe space such as this have several benefits. In software engineering, things change swiftly, so being in the know about new technologies is paramount. Other technical organizations also share information about new tools, but again, feeling comfortable enough to ask questions and have a dialogue is essential to being able to grow. Other than how useful a piece of software is, minority engineers may also find a product interesting simply because it was built by a fellow person of color or to serve communities of color. These tools typically aren’t shared within mainstream technical groups.

Empowerment

Negative stereotypes about black people are still prevalent in our society, and they can sometimes seep into our psyches. Being surrounded by intellectual minorities that are at a similar point in their career or even where we dream of being can be incredibly empowering. Black people rarely see representation of people that look like us, and that can sometimes be discouraging. Being reminded that there are folks like ourselves that are crushing obstacles and excelling can be the extra push that we need to keep going. Not to mention the possibility of setting our own example for the younger generation. We hope to provide a community that forever changes lives by encouraging advancement in the field of software development.


Written by Taylor Poindexter


D.C.-based software engineer Taylor Poindexter has worked in tech for eight years, starting out as an IT consultant and working her way to different roles before coming to a crossroads that’s experienced by many Black women — and many Black people who enter tech: Is the juice worth the squeeze? Is this career in tech worth all the hurdles and setbacks that only seem to happen to them?

Fresh out of the University of Virginia in 2013, Poindexter got a job at an IT consultancy as an automation engineer. It was the job nobody wanted to do. For Poindexter, that meant it was the job she was gunning for.

“That’s how I decided I would build the foundation of my career — doing the things no one else wanted to do to prove myself to the company,” said Poindexter.

And it worked: She moved from client to client, and position-to-position through the company over the next four years. Her roles included quality assurance lead, automation engineer and data integration engineer. As hard as she worked to prove herself through the years, she had reached a breaking point.

“I didn’t have psychological safety with my very first manager out of college. I feel like my confidence was really damaged,” said Poindexter. “It kind of just absolutely depleted me. But what I was trying to explain to a friend is that sometimes, you know, as a white man, a lot of times you navigate through the world and it’s constantly reinforcing, that you’re supposed to be here, you’re supported and it’s uplifting you. Whereas, as a Black woman, that’s often not my case. I’m constantly having to defend myself in one way or another, most days from microaggressions or feeling like maybe some people wouldn’t want me in this space to begin with.”

A recent report on equality in tech from tech hiring platform Dice states 58% of women respondents reported discrimination where their technical skills weren’t respected, while 24% of men reported such discrimination. When accounting for race, 40% of Black respondents reported discrimination where their technical skills weren’t respected vs. 18% of white respondents.

It’s a tale of two different work environments.

“Having that extra mental baggage can be a lot to start off with,” said Poindexter. “When you layer on top a condescending and unsupportive manager, that can really bring somebody to their knees. Whereas for [her coworker], he just goes, [the manager] can be a jerk, it’s fine, I’ll just put my head down and keep on working. That just didn’t work for me because we started at different baselines.”

A Gallup report found that one in two employees leave a job to get away from their managers and improve their overall well-being. We’ve heard this in our reporting, too: It was issues with poor managers that led to April Curley having issues at Google, and may account for the rise in attrition among Black women, according to the company’s 2020 diversity report.

On the other side of the coin, it was a great mentor and manager that pulled Poindexter back into tech and supported her through the interview process at the startup she worked at for multiple years, until its acquisition.

Seeing people that look like you in positions that you one day hope to be in is very validating.
“I was telling him, I’m going to leave this company in the next couple of months and I’m going to go to the business side, because people keep trying to push me towards that. And I just don’t think I’m cut out to be an engineer,” said Poindexter. “He was like, I’m going to help you leave this company and I’m going to help you find a place that you feel comfortable asking questions so that you can grow. I promise you can be a software engineer. You stick with it. If it doesn’t work out at this next company, you can stop worrying about everything.”

Poindexter chose a path less travelled, according to Pew Research data. When it comes to the STEM computer workforce, Black people account for 7%, while women account for 25%. She started working as a software engineer at D.C.-based civic engagement startup in a workplace culture that encouraged asking questions and had senior developers that prioritized setting a solid foundation for her career. Now, she’s in it for the long haul.

That was in 2017. Poindexter worked with the company for four years as a software engineer, then as a backend engineer. In 2019, the company was acquired. She decided to move on in February of 2021. Bringing companies together in a merger requires internal work of aligning on culture and mission, and that process can be difficult.

“I just found that process itself to be a bit draining. After being there for four years, instead of sticking it through the acquisition I’d rather move on and dig more into [software engineering],” said Poindexter.

The key things Poindexter is looking for at a future company is that it offers more than lip service to diversity, equity and inclusion, a work/life balance, consistent priorities for the company, and psychological safety.

Poindexter herself has created a safe space for Black engineers with the Black Code Collective. It has grown to have close to 2000 members in the D.C. area and is a space where Black computer engineers can network, share experiences and get advice. She’s also fostered more transparency in tech salaries with a tech salary transparency Google form, with the data aggregated by Cody Braun on Github.

“Being able to have a community that you can come back to, and sometimes maybe complain to or get advice from, can be uplifting and really keep people going in their careers,” said Poindexter. “Seeing people that look like you in positions that you one day hope to be in is very validating.”
